README.md, before:

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL%20v3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/elisp-lsp/ellsp.svg?logo=github)](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/releases/latest)
[![JCS-ELPA](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jcs-emacs/badges/master/elpa/v/ellsp.svg)](https://jcs-emacs.github.io/jcs-elpa/#/ellsp)

# Ellsp
> Elisp Language Server

[![CI Elisp](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/test-elisp.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/test-elisp.yml)
[![Build Proxy](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/build-proxy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/build-proxy.yml)

This software is intended for use with editors other than Emacs.
If you're already an Emacs user, we recommend using Emacs directly
with both ‘company-mode’ and ‘flycheck-mode’ which are available in
Emacs out of the box.

Here is the list of currently supported editors:

- [Emacs]() (`M-x ellsp-register`)
- [VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jcs090218.Ellsp)

## ✒️ Rationale

This software is intended to support editors beyond Emacs, targeting users who
wish to work with Emacs Lisp in a more performant and responsive environment.
Due to its single-threaded architecture, Emacs can become unresponsive when
executing computationally intensive tasks.

A strong reference implementation is Emacs [Elsa][], which utilizes the Language
Server Protocol (LSP) to delegate static analysis and other heavy operations
to a separate Emacs process. This decoupling not only improves responsiveness
in the primary editor but also enables parallelism, making large-scale analysis
more practical.

## 🖼️ Gallery

### Completion

<img src="./etc/completion.png"/>

### Hover

<img src="./etc/hover.png"/>

### Signature Help

<img src="./etc/signature.png"/>

## 🔧 Prerequisites

Before installation, make sure you have all the following software installed!

- [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/)
- [Eask](https://github.com/emacs-eask/cli)

## 💾 Installation

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Ellsp can only be used with projects that utilize Eask as their package manager.
> Ensure your project is properly set up with Eask before using Ellsp.

Add these lines to your `Eask`-file:

```elisp
(source 'gnu)
(source 'melpa)
(source 'jcs-elpa)

(development
 (depends-on "ellsp"))
```

Then install the language server:

```sh
# Install ellsp package.
eask install-deps --dev

# Install the proxy server.
eask exec install-ellsp
```

To test to see if the server installed successfully, execute the following command:

```sh
eask exec ellsp
```

If you see the following screen (no error), you successfully installed the language server! 🎉🥳

```sh
Updating environment variables... done v
Exporting environment variables... done v
18:45:59 [INFO ] Starting the language server...
```

*🔊 P.S. Nothing output afterward because the language server is waiting for the
language client to connect!*

## 🔬 Development

To test the language server locally:

```sh
# Add link to current package
eask link add ellsp ./
```

Then follow the same steps as installation:

```sh
# Install the proxy server.
eask exec install-ellsp

# Test the language server.
eask exec ellsp
```

## 🔗 References

- [Language Server Protocol Specification][LSP Specification]
- [Elsa][]

## Contribute

[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](http://makeapullrequest.com)
[![Elisp styleguide](https://img.shields.io/badge/elisp-style%20guide-purple?logo=gnuemacs&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/bbatsov/emacs-lisp-style-guide)
[![Donate on paypal](https://img.shields.io/badge/paypal-donate-1?logo=paypal&color=blue)](https://www.paypal.me/jcs090218)
[![Become a patron](https://img.shields.io/badge/patreon-become%20a%20patron-orange.svg?logo=patreon)](https://www.patreon.com/jcs090218)

If you would like to contribute to this project, you may either
clone or make pull requests to this repository. Or you can
clone the project and establish your branch of this tool.
Any methods are welcome!

## ⚜️ License

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

See [`LICENSE`](./LICENSE) for details.


<!-- Links -->

[LSP Specification]: https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/
[Elsa]: https://github.com/emacs-elsa/Elsa

Commit message:

Leave it open as how much more can be use in Emacs when developing emacs lisp

README.md, after:

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL%20v3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/elisp-lsp/ellsp.svg?logo=github)](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/releases/latest)
[![JCS-ELPA](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jcs-emacs/badges/master/elpa/v/ellsp.svg)](https://jcs-emacs.github.io/jcs-elpa/#/ellsp)

# Ellsp
> Elisp Language Server

[![CI Elisp](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/test-elisp.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/test-elisp.yml)
[![Build Proxy](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/build-proxy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/elisp-lsp/ellsp/actions/workflows/build-proxy.yml)

This software is intended for use with editors other than Emacs.
If you're already an Emacs user, we recommend using Emacs directly,
taking advantage of commands like ‘company-mode’, ‘flycheck-mode’ and
more, that are available in Emacs out of the box.

Here is the list of currently supported editors:

- [Emacs]() (`M-x ellsp-register`)
- [VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jcs090218.Ellsp)

## ✒️ Rationale

This software is intended to support editors beyond Emacs, targeting users who
wish to work with Emacs Lisp in a more performant and responsive environment.
Due to its single-threaded architecture, Emacs can become unresponsive when
executing computationally intensive tasks.

A strong reference implementation is Emacs [Elsa][], which utilizes the Language
Server Protocol (LSP) to delegate static analysis and other heavy operations
to a separate Emacs process. This decoupling not only improves responsiveness
in the primary editor but also enables parallelism, making large-scale analysis
more practical.

## 🖼️ Gallery

### Completion

<img src="./etc/completion.png"/>

### Hover

<img src="./etc/hover.png"/>

### Signature Help

<img src="./etc/signature.png"/>

## 🔧 Prerequisites

Before installation, make sure you have all the following software installed!

- [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/)
- [Eask](https://github.com/emacs-eask/cli)

## 💾 Installation

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Ellsp can only be used with projects that utilize Eask as their package manager.
> Ensure your project is properly set up with Eask before using Ellsp.

Add these lines to your `Eask`-file:

```elisp
(source 'gnu)
(source 'melpa)
(source 'jcs-elpa)

(development
 (depends-on "ellsp"))
```

Then install the language server:

```sh
# Install ellsp package.
eask install-deps --dev

# Install the proxy server.
eask exec install-ellsp
```

To test to see if the server installed successfully, execute the following command:

```sh
eask exec ellsp
```

If you see the following screen (no error), you successfully installed the language server! 🎉🥳

```sh
Updating environment variables... done v
Exporting environment variables... done v
18:45:59 [INFO ] Starting the language server...
```

*🔊 P.S. Nothing output afterward because the language server is waiting for the
language client to connect!*

## 🔬 Development

To test the language server locally:

```sh
# Add link to current package
eask link add ellsp ./
```

Then follow the same steps as installation:

```sh
# Install the proxy server.
eask exec install-ellsp

# Test the language server.
eask exec ellsp
```

## 🔗 References

- [Language Server Protocol Specification][LSP Specification]
- [Elsa][]

## Contribute

[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](http://makeapullrequest.com)
[![Elisp styleguide](https://img.shields.io/badge/elisp-style%20guide-purple?logo=gnuemacs&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/bbatsov/emacs-lisp-style-guide)
[![Donate on paypal](https://img.shields.io/badge/paypal-donate-1?logo=paypal&color=blue)](https://www.paypal.me/jcs090218)
[![Become a patron](https://img.shields.io/badge/patreon-become%20a%20patron-orange.svg?logo=patreon)](https://www.patreon.com/jcs090218)

If you would like to contribute to this project, you may either
clone or make pull requests to this repository. Or you can
clone the project and establish your branch of this tool.
Any methods are welcome!

## ⚜️ License

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

See [`LICENSE`](./LICENSE) for details.


<!-- Links -->

[LSP Specification]: https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/
[Elsa]: https://github.com/emacs-elsa/Elsa
